### Question 1.

The digits $\{1,2,\ldots,6\}$ are randomly arranged in a row to form a permutation (so all permutations have the same probability).

a. What is the sample space?

b. Find the probability that the first digit is $1$ and last digit is $6$.

c. Find the probability that the odd numbers occur consecutively (i.e. side by side). This is true for example for the permutation $215346$.



#### Solution. 

a. The sample space is $S = \{abcdef \;| \;a, b, c, d, e, f \in {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, a \neq b \neq c \neq d \neq e \neq f\}$. For example, $\{123456, 234561, 124563, 654321\} \subset S$. 

b. The probability that the first digit is $1$ and the last digit is $6$:

​		$\displaystyle P(\text{permutation of the form }1*****6) = \frac{4!}{6!} = \frac{1}{30}$.

c. The probability that the odd number occur consecutively:

​		$\displaystyle P(\text{permutation with consecutive odd numbers}) = \frac{4 \cdot 3! \cdot 3!}{6!} = \frac{1}{5}$. 



### Question 2.

There are $10000$ tickets in a lottery. Three tickets are drawn without replacement and awarded first, second and third prize respectively. The draws are without replacement. Suppose you hold three of the $10000$ tickets.

a. What is the sample space?

b. Find the probability that you win 3rd prize and that is the only prize you win.

c. Find the probability that you win at least one prize.



#### Solution.

a. The sample space is $S = \{$ win zero prize, win one prize, win two prizes, win three prizes $\}$. 

b. The probability of only winning the third prize is

​	$\displaystyle \begin{align*} P(\text{win 3rd}) &= P(\text{not win 1st}) \cdot P(\text{not win 2nd)} \cdot P(\text{win 3rd})\\ &= \frac{9997}{10000} \cdot \frac{9996}{9999}  \cdot \frac{3}{9998} \approx 0.0002999\end{align*}$ 

c. The probability of winning at least one prize is 

​	$\displaystyle \begin{align*} P(\text{win at least one}) &= 1 - P(\text{not win anything})\\ &= 1 - \frac{9997\cdot9996\cdot9995}{10000 \cdot 9999 \cdot 9998}\\&\approx 0.0008999 \end{align*}.$ 		       	



### Q3.

Suppose $A$, $B$ and $C$ are three events such that $A$ and $C$ are mutually exclusive and $B$ is independent of $C$. Also suppose that $P(A)=0.3, P(B)=0.45, P(A∩B)=0.1, P(C)=0.5.$ Find $P(C|\bar{D})$ where $D=A∪B.$



#### Solution.

- $P(A\cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A\cap B) \Rightarrow P(D) = P(A\cup B) = 0.3 + 0.45 - 0.1 = 0.65.$

- $P(D) = P(A\cup B) = 0.65 \Rightarrow P(\neg D) = 1-0.65 = 0.35.$

- $P(C\cap \neg D) $

  $= P(C) - P(C \cap D) $

  $= P(C) - P(C) - P(D) + P(C \cup D)$

  $ = P(C) - P(C) - P(D) + P(C \cup A \cup B)$ 

  $= P(C) - P(C) - P(D) + P(A) + P(B) + P(C) - P(AB) - P(AC) - P(BC) + P(ABC)$

  $= P(C) - P(A\cup B) + P(A) + P(B) - P(A\cap B) - P(AC) - P(BC) + P(ABC)$

  $= P(C) - P(B)\cdot P(C)$

  $ = 0.5 - 0.5 \cdot 0.45$

  $= 0.5 - 0.225$

  $= 0.275$ 

- $\displaystyle P(C|\neg D) = \frac{P(C\cap \neg D)}{P(\neg D)} = \frac{0.275}{0.35} \approx 0.786$.

