# LEC 2018-01-16

---

[TOC]



## Input Continued

#### What have we lost by accepting inputs?

- ***Referential Transparency***:
  - The same expression has the same value every time whenever it is evaluated. 
    - e.g. $\texttt{(f 4)}$ always produce the same value.
    - e.g. $\texttt{(let ((z (f 4))) body)}$: every z in body can be replaced by (f 4) and vice versa; "equals can be substituted for equals."
  - But this is not true anymore -- for example, if I use the function $\texttt{read}$, it probably won't return the same value every time. Thus it's harder for us to reason about program, because simple algebraic manipulation is no longer possible. _This is one of the difference between functional vs. imperative programming._ 

---

## Intro to C

#### Expressions

```c
// infix operator
1 + 2

// function calls
f(7)
3 + f(x, y, z)

// print function, %d stands for decimal
// produces the number of characters printed
printf("%d\n", 5)

```

- Precedence: use usual mathematical conventions.



#### Statements

- ```c
  // take an expression and add a semicolon at the end
  printf("%d\n", 5);
  ```
  - The value produced by the statement is ignored.
  - The expression is evaluated only for its side-effects. 


- ```c
  1 + 2; //legal, but useless
  ```


- ```c
  return 0; // produce the value 0 as the result of this function
  ```
  - Control returns immediately to the caller.


- ```c
  ; // empty statement (does nothing)
  ```



#### Blocks

- Groups of statements, treated as one statement.
- C: 

```c
{ 
  stmt1
  stmt2
  .
  .
  .
  stmtN
}
```

- Racket:

```scheme
(void
 stmt1
 stmt2
 .
 .
 .
 stmtN
 )
 
```



#### Functions 

- C:

```c
int f(int x, int y) {
  printf("x = %d, y = %d\n", x, y);
  return x + y;
}
```

- Racket:

```scheme
;; f : Num -> Num -> Num
(define (f x y)
  (printf "x = ~a, y = ~a\n" x y)
  (+ x y))
```

- The notion of contract in Racket is an artificial thing that Racket itself doesn't care; it's our message to the user. But in C, $\texttt{int f(int x, int y) {...}}$ is legit code instead of comments. We must obey it to make the function work properly.



#### Program

- A program is a sequence of functions.

- Starting point: function $\texttt{main}$.

  ​

**Our first program** 

```c
int main() {
  f(4, 3);
  return 0;
}

int f(int x, int y) {
  printf("x = %d, y = %d\n", x, y);
  return x + y;
}
 
// Doesn't compile...
```

 - C compilers, unlike Racket compilers, runs from the top to the bottom. 


- Therefore $\texttt{main}$ does not know what $\texttt{f}$ is.


- Conclusion: **C enforces declaration before use**
  - You can't use a function/variable/etc. until you tell C about it. 
  - Why? Historical reasons... But in theory, C programs can be compiled with a one-pass compiler. 
- Fix it: write $\texttt{f}$ before $\texttt{main}$? OK, but it's more than necessary.



**A very important note: decoration _vs._ definition**

```c
int f(int x, int y) {
  printf("x = %d, y = %d\n", x, y);
  return x + y;
}
```

- This is both a **decoration** (where I tell C about the function) and a **definition** (which completely constructs the function).
  - Decoration: "_there is a function that takes two integers and produces an integer_."
  - Definition/Creation: _creating the function_. 
- **C only requires decoration before use.** _I only need to tell C that there exists such a function $\texttt{f}$_.
- Thus, what we can do is, $\texttt{int f(int x, int y);}$ 
  - This is called a **function prototype**, or **header**
  - This is just a decoration. We need to define the function later in the program.
- **Remark.** This also solves the problem of mutual recursion. 

```c
int f(int x, int y);

int main() {
  f(4, 3);
  return 0;
}

int f(int x, int y) {
  printf("x = %d, y = %d\n", x, y);
  return x + y;
}
 
// Still doesn't compile... well, what's printf?? C doesn't know what printf is..xd
```



**Solution: $\texttt{#include}$ some stuff!!** 

- Rather than declare every standard library function header before you use it, C provides ***header files***. These files came with the compiler, so you don't need to write them by yourself.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int f(int x, int y);

int main() {
  f(4, 3);
  return 0;
}

int f(int x, int y) {
  printf("x = %d, y = %d\n", x, y);
  return x + y;
}
 
// Finally works...
```

- What is $\texttt{#include}$?
  - A ***C preprocessor directive***
  - This runs before the compiler; it is very similar to the **macro expansion** in Racket. 
  - Here, the C preprocessor transforms this code into something else, then compile it. 
  - $\texttt{#include <file.h>}$ : "drop the contents of $\texttt{<file.h>}$ right here."
- Standard-IO:
  - Contains declarations for $\texttt{printf}$ and other IO functions.
  - Where is it? Located in a "standard place", ie. a place where your compiler knows where to look. 
- $\texttt{printf}$?
  - It is written once, compiled once, and what you get is the binary of the function.
  - It is also located at the "standard place". 
- Code for $\texttt{printf}$ must be combined with this code -- ***linking***
  - A ***linker*** takes care of this (runs automatically).
  - This linker "knows" to link the code for $\texttt{printf}$. 
- If you write your own modules, you need to tell the linker about them (later).



**More about $\texttt{main}$**

- Your main function also returns a value -- $\texttt{return 0;}$ 
- This goes to the operating system.
- What for? To indicate whether the program was successful
- _Fun fact_: type $\texttt{echo \$?}$ you would get the return value of the function you last ran. 

---

## Variables

```c
int f(int x, int y) {
  int z = x + y;
  int w = 2;
  return z / w;
}
```

- You need to be exclusive about what type of value a variable holds. 

---

##Input

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
  char c = getchar();
  return c;
}
```

- $\texttt{char}$ are just small $\texttt{int}$ 's. XD



**Read in a number**

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int getIntHelper(int acc){
  char c = getchar();
  if (c >= '0' && c <= '9'){
    return getIntHelper(acc * 10 + c - '0');
  } else {
    return acc;
  }
  
int getInt(){
  return  getIntHelper(0);
}
```



---

Questions

1. **Linking**
2. **Preprocessor directive**.